# zarr_implementations Developer Guide

## Overview

This repository contains scripts to generate datasets in zarr-v2, zarr-v3 and
N5 formats via a number of different implementations. Once generated, the test
suite will attempt to have each library read all datasets with a supported
format.

Both data generation and testing steps can be be run from the root of the
repository via the command:

```bash
make test
```

To generate data only use:

```bash
make data
```
or to generate only the data from a specific library, use:

```bash
make zarrita
```

## Creating a development environment

The `environment.yml` file in the base of the repository lists the
requirements for `zarr_implementations`. To create a new conda environment
named `zarr_impl_dev` with the necessary dependencies installed, use

```bash
conda env create --name zarr_impl_dev --file environment.yml
```

and then activate the environment via

```bash
conda activate zarr_impl_dev
```

## Data Generation

All test data is currently generated from a common image file that gets
generated by the script `generate_data/generate_reference_image.py`. Each
library that generates data currently has either a python script or a shell
script that will generate datasets for the supported file types and codecs.
Some implementations also generate versions using both flat and nested file
storage.

The data generation script is a python script in the case of libraries with a
Python API. For non-Python projects, a subfolder named after the project is
typically created. Within this subfolder is a shell script that compiles and/or
runs a program to generate the data. See the `Makefile` and the corresponding
scripts that it executes for reference. At the time of writing these include
the following concrete examples:

Library Name | data generation script language(s) | base output file name
-------------|------------------------------------|----------------------
zarr-python  | Python                             | zarr
z5py         | Python                             | z5py
zarrita      | Python                             | zarrita
pyn5         | Python                             | pyn5
zarr.js      | bash + node-js                     | js
n5-java      | bash + Java (Maven)                | n5-java
xtensor-zarr | bash + C++ (CMake)                 | xtensor_zarr

Care should be taken to note the output file name used during generation, as
the same name will need to be used in the test scripts later.

The name of the directory used to store the data should end with one of the
following extensions. The extension will be parsed later at testing time, to
determine the contained file format.

File Format | Directory Extension
------------|--------------------
zarr (v2)   | .zr
zarr (v3)   | .zr3
N5          | .n5

### Codec storage

Currently the same data is stored as separate arrays within the dataset where
the names of the arrays match the codec used. Currently the following are
tested for libraries that support them:

Codec       | Array (Dataset) Name
------------|---------------------
None        | raw
gzip        | gzip
zlib        | zlib
BLOSC + lz4 | blosc/lz4

### Flat vs. Nested Data

Some libraries support storing arrays in either a flat (single directory)
format or a nested storage format. In such cases the base filename (excluding
its extension) should end in either `_flat` or `_nested` to indicate this.
For example `xtensor-zarr` data stored in zarr-v3 format with nested storage
would be named: `xtensor_zarr_nested.zr3`. Not all implementations have
metadata indicating of the storage is flat or nested so the testing scripts
currently tend to set a `nested` boolean flag depending on whether `_nested` is
in the filename.

### Storage classes

Currently `zarr-python` also stores data with multiple different underlying
storage classes. In this specific case, the name of the storage class is also
indicated in the filename. For example, zarr (v2) is stored in flat format with
both a `Directory_Store` class and an `FSStore` class, corresponding to the
filenames `zarr_DirectoryStore_flat.zr` and `zarr_FSStore_flat.zr`,
respectively.


## Read Tests

### Running the tests

Currently all tests reside in a single file, `test/test_read_all.py`. If the
data has already been generated, tests can be run from the root folder of the
repository via:

```bash
pytest test/test_real_all.py -v
```

alternatively, the make command, `make test`, will generate the data and then
run the tests.

### Writing tests

When adding a new library to the test suite, a corresponding entry for the
library should be added to the `READABLE_CODECS` dictionary. Here is the entry
for zarrita as a concrete example:

```Python
    "zarrita": {
        "zarr": [],
        "zarr-v3": ["blosc", "gzip", "raw", "zlib"],
        "N5": [],
    },
```

The value here is a dictionary where the keys correspond to the three file
types tested by `zarr_implementations` and the values are the codecs that this
implementation should be able to read. For `zarrita`, the lists for zarr (v2)
and N5 are empty because these file formats are unsupported.

Secondly, a Python function capable of reading a file with the library needs
to be created and a corresponding entry added to the dictionary within
`_get_read_fn` that maps implementation names to a corresponding fucntion for
reading from that format. This read function should have the following
signature:

```Python
 read_with_LIBNAME(fpath, ds_name, nested=None)
```

where `fpath` is a file path, `ds_name` is a dataset name within the file and
`nested` is an optional boolean flag indicating whether the data is stored in
a nested format. Typically this function just reads in the specified dataset
and returns a NumPy array corresponding to it.

### Read tests for non-Python implementations

For non-Python implementations, the data reader function may call a binary
program or shell script that does the actual reading and/or validation. This
program can be called via Python's `subprocess` module.

For non-Python implementations it is also possible to have the data reader
function that is returned by `_get_read_fn` do the array validation internally
rather than generate a NumPy array. In the case where internal validation is
being performed, the function should return `None` to indicate that validation
ucceeded and raise an error, otherwise.

For concrete examples of non-Python validation functions see the `xtensor-zarr`
(C++) and `jzarr` (Java) implementations. `xtensor-zarr` calls a compiled C++
program that reads the specified data file and writes the contents out to a
NumPy `.npy` array for later validation in Python. On the contraray, the
`jzarr` reading program does the validation internally and returns a non-zero
exit code if validation failed.

### Test parametrization

Adding the read function entry to `_get_read_fn` and updating `READABLE_CODECS`
dictionary as described above should be sufficient to get new parameterized
test cases automatically generated for the new library via the `create_params`
functions. The `test_correct_read` function is the core test function that then
runs over all sets of parameters generated by `create_params`. In most cases it
should not be necessary to modify `create_params` or `test_correct_read`
itself.


## Summary Report Generation

A summary report can be generated by calling the same test function, but via
python rather than pytest. In this case, Pandas summary tables corresponding to
success or failure of each write/read library combination are generated and
exported as Markdown (`report.md`) and HTML (`report.html`) files. The
reports are generated using the same `create_params` parameter sets used by
pytest so it should not be necessary to make any changes to the reporting
functions themselves as new libraries are added.

The specific format of the reports and method of report generation is still
considered experimental and is subject to change as the library evolves.
